>> Jason Lengstorf: All right, so our
first piece here is going to be to create
a form, so that we can track
what people are searching for.
They need to be able to actually input
a search term and then we wanna take
that search term on submitting the form,
rewrite the URL with it.
So that means that we need to make
the search term URL-friendly.
So we're gonna do a little bit of string
munging to make that work and then we'll
also get into programmatic navigation with
Gatsby using the navigate helper function.
So first, we're just gonna hop
into our source folder and
let's create a components folder and
inside of that, we'll create a form.
And this is gonna be our search form.
So I'm gonna import React from React.
And then we're gonna set up our form,
so const form, and
that will return something,
that will export default.
>> Jason Lengstorf: Okay, so inside of
our form, we want to set up just a form.
And then, onSubmit,
we need to do something.
So let's create a function
called handleSubmit.
>> Jason Lengstorf: And
that's gonna do something, and
then inside of our form,
we're going to set up a label.
And inside of the label
we'll say search by name.
And then we'll add
an input of the type text.
We will give it a name of name.
And we'll set a value.
And because we want to control the value,
we want React to manage it.
We don't want it to be
kind of user-land managed.
We're going to use the use state hook.
So let's set up use state,
and we'll say value.
set value.
And that's going to be the result of use
state, and we'll just start it out empty.
So our value here is going to be value.
And then on change,
we're going to handle input,
which will be another helper function.
>> Jason Lengstorf: And
then below, outside of our label,
we're going to add a button.
That button is gonna
be of the type Submit.
And it'll just say search.
So, that is most of what we need.
But now we need to make this,
we need to handle input.
So we can set up const handle input,
and that's also gonna be a function.
>> Jason Lengstorf: So
for handling the input,
what we really wanna do is just get
the current value and drop it in.
So we can just get the event and
then we're gonna set the value
to event target value.
And that will allow us to
type in the field, and
that'll update the state whenever we type.
It's a pretty standard way of
controlling inputs in React.
If you've done this
using class components,
the useState hook is such
a breath of fresh air in terms of
how simple it makes it to control inputs.
We're not writing out special class
methods and then binding this to them and
doing all these things that are like,
you know,
they're easy once you've memorized
how they work but it's not easy.
useState is a little bit funky to look at
because when you look at hooks they've got
these kind of array destructuring set up,
and
they kind of feel like magic a little bit.
But once the the model kind of sets in,
it really makes things straightforward and
declarative, which is really,
really wonderful to work with.
In our handle, submit, what we want to do,
is again, we're going to get an event.
But in this case, we wanna prevent
the form from going anywhere.
We don't wanna like navigate to
another page or refresh the page or
any of the things that forms
will typically do by default.
So we're gonna do event.preventDefault,
and
that will prevent the form from,
you know, blowing away our React app and
taking us to, or
like refreshing the page or anything.
Underneath that,
we need to turn the search
string into a URL-friendly query.
And then,
we need to actually,
>> Jason Lengstorf: Change
the URL to match our search results.
>> Jason Lengstorf: So,
to turn this into a search-friendly query,
we're gonna take the value up here,
which could be anything.
So what I'll actually do is, let's just
get this on the screen, so we can see it.
And then we'll start playing
with how to handle the form.
So let's get this.
We're going to use that
auto-import because that's neat.
And then up here, that does what we want.
Don't need that link actually.
So let's get that out of there.
And so now I've got a form.
So let's start this up.
I'm going to do netlify dev.
>> Jason Lengstorf: Okay, success, all
right, and so now we've got a form, and
we can type into it and
it's doing what we expect.
So if I move the console down here,
so we can see it and
then make it much bigger so
we can read it, I can set this by
default to console log value.
So let's just take a field and
search it, and it's gonna log something.
Okay, good.
So our form does submit.
It handles the submit properly,
it's not refreshing the page or anything.
So the next thing that we want
to do is what if somebody
types in like Rick & Morty,
something like that,
that would break any URL,
we can't just like link to that.
It's also not particularly useful in the
context of the lookup that we're doing.
So because we know that our
API's a text-based search,
we don't need any special characters, so
that drastically simplifies our job here.
So the first thing that I want to do is,
I'm just gonna go ahead and
let's start by creating a new variable,
which is gonna initially be the value,
but then I'm gonna do
a couple of transformations.
I'm gonna change it to lowercase,
I'm gonna trim any white space
from the beginning and end.
Then I'm gonna get into regular
expression replacement.
So we'll use a regex.
And I'm going to create a set and
say anything that is not
a word character or a space,
>> Jason Lengstorf: And
we're gonna go global with that,
it's going to be replaced with nothing.
So we're basically going through and
stripping out any
special characters,
any non-space white space, all in.
And so that's the letters A through Z and
the number zero through nine.
That's what the slash lowercase w allows.
And the space character is
just the space character.
So not new lines, not tabs,
nothing like that.
So we're being pretty restrictive
about what we're allowing.
And then, because I wanna pass this in
the URL and I don't want a bunch of ugly,
like, percent 20s in there, I'm going
to also replace any space character.
And we will do one or more,
just in case somebody says, like,
Rick 15 spaces and then Morty,
we don't like 15 hyphens, that's silly.
So we're going to do one or
more space characters.
And again, we'll go global with that,
and we'll replace it with a hyphen.
So now I have this query.
So let's console log it.
>> Jason Lengstorf: Okay, so
upon doing that, what I should get is for
an average query,
like if I just type someone's name,
nothing really changes, but
if I start adding a bunch of nonsense in
here,
>> Jason Lengstorf: It strips it to just
the actual letter characters, and does so
in a way that would work in a URL.
So that's kind of what we're after, right?
Is we want something that we can put
in a URL and make it linkable, and
we'll deal with reversing
this in the results session.
So, now that we know these are there,
and it's doing what we want,
we can use this query
to rewrite our history.
And to do that, we're going to use
the navigate helper from Gatsby.
So we're gonna import
navigate from Gatsby,
and inside of our handler,
we're just going to navigate.
>> Jason Lengstorf: To search,
and we'll use the query.
And then,
we're also going to pass that down.
So we'll put it in the state as query.
>> Jason Lengstorf: So this means that
we can pull the state that we've created
right out of the query without
having to parse the url or anything,
when it's a local click.
We'll still have to parse the URL
when someone sends a link.
But we can skip some work in the case
that somebody's doing it locally,
which will be, really,
the most common use case.
So upon doing this,
what should happen is whenever we search,
so I'll say, let's say, Morty, our URL
just changed, and now it says slash Morty.
And if I put a bunch of junk in here and
then say Rick,
it gets edited to Morty dash Rick.
Cool.
Okay, that's doing what we want.
So let's save our work.
And then we'll get that
results page working.